Yeah, we'll talk a little bit, and then I'll go back
and test it, and then we'll start over again. And
this is how I'm going to start out. This is an
interview with Mr. Kerry Colley by Danny West on
April 29, 1991, at his place of business in Bryan,
Texas, concerning the civil rights movement. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge, I am
asking you to donate these tapes to me or to the
Texas A&M Oral History Collection in the
University Archives. Is that all right with you?
That's fine. Okay.
First, I'm going to just ask a couple of background
questions. First of all, where and when were you
born? On November 4, 1941, in Brunner, Alabama.
Okay. And where were you raised? Were you raised in
Alabama? Alabama. Until when did you move to
Texas? I came to Texas in 62. 62. Oh, okay, good. I
have a question to ask you later on that maybe
you'll be able to answer that one, too. And since
you were raised in the South, I assume that whites
and blacks attended both segregated schools.
Correct. How did the white schools compare with
the black schools? There was no comparison. There
was no comparison. Our school had a potbellied
stove with coal, and it was wooden structure that
was... appeared to be hundreds of years old. And
the white school was a nice brick structure with
central heating and what have you. The books that
we received were like hand-me-down books. They
were books that were out of date, books that had
adopted a new set. And we got the older books. Even
basketball was played outdoors at our school on
the ground. We didn't have a gym. There were gyms
and things like this at the white school. So that
was a marked difference between the schools. Were
those schools ever integrated before you left?
No. Were they long after? Long, long after. They
were some of the last to be integrated. And today
there, what they've done to get around
integration, only the poor whites go to the county
and the city schools. The middle and upper class
whites go to an academy, a private academy that has
been established. Let's see. Okay, this is the one
I was going to ask you about, maybe you knew about
locally. Locally, I was talking with my teacher,
and he said that he heard that the Bryan High School
was burned down, or that it burned down, and that's
how they ended up integrating the school system. I
was not in 62. I was teaching school at the time. I
was in 70. Here in... 69, yes. It didn't burn. The
Bryan High School didn't burn down. That was
the... Old Bryant, the original Old Bryant
colored high, which was at that time was an
elementary school, Washington Elementary,
which is right across the street here, where this
park is now. It burned. And I taught at Neal Junior
High, which was the old Kemp High school. It
burned. It was all within the same year. Oh,
really? Yeah. Within the same year. Less than six
months apart. And did they have to, what did they do
after, did they? Well, at first, we were crowded
into the black schools. And as a result of these
schools burning, though, it speeded up the
process of integration. At the time, Bryan was in a
grade-a-year plan to integrate the schools.
There was an old system devised by the South to
delay integration as much as possible. So if you
went to court, you could get, say, well, we'll
integrate one grade a year. Right, OK. And also at
that time, a lawsuit had been filed by the NAACP, a
gentleman that lives right up here on the corner,
Jaylev Thomas, because of his son, Clarence
Thomas, who wanted to go to the schools here. And as
a result of that, the court suit and the fires and
all the things that were happening at the time, the
schools weren't
integrated. How did blacks feel, for the most
part, about integration at the time? I mean, did
they want to do that? To answer you honestly, not
really. But the only way that they felt that they
could get an equal school with a quality
education, same facility, was to go to the same
school. You can't have, no two things are exactly
alike. You can't have separate and equal.
Separate is, as the Supreme Court has said, the end
of itself is unequal. There were some blacks who
wanted to go to the white schools. There were some
that didn't. There were a lot of fears and
pressures on the blacks at the time. But in spite of
those fears and pressures, they felt that for
their children, and the children felt for
themselves, that it was the best thing that could
have happened. How did you perceive whites to feel
about it? Were they just as scared about it? They
had anxieties, too. And there were some who
looked down on blacks. And this is my personal
feeling from what I saw and observed. You had the
elite group. And most of the towns in the south,
they leave whites. We kind of ran the town. And the
poor whites were just as bad off as the blacks. They
just didn't realize it. But the only thing that
they had that was better than the blacks was that
they were white. And they felt like, you know, I'm
speculating on this, that if my child goes to
school with this black child, then somehow it
brings us down a lot too. So that was a tremendous
resistance to it.
One of the books that we talked about, I don't know
if you've heard of it before, it's called Black
Like Me. Yeah, Ralph Ellison. Yeah. And we read
that, and one of the quotes in there is he was just
talking about how just after a few days, how he'd
been in the South, he said that it just became very
obvious to him that the black man knew nothing
about the white man, and the white man was totally
ignorant of the black man, also that they were
ignorant of each other. Two separate societies.
How do you feel about that? Well, he's correct.
There did exist two separate societies.
I may be a little bit, in one sense, a little bit more
fortunate than some other blacks. My granddad and
my great granddad were both land owners. And my dad
was in business. And as a result of the respect that
my granddad had and my dad had acquired in their
separate communities, there was some
interaction.
Also, my great-grandmother. Between the white?
Between my family, and so I knew some of the white
man's ways. My great-grandmother and my
grandmother's dads were white.
And there were some whites who did look out for
their offspring.
But my granddad was black, Jamaican, and there
were the two separate societies. In spite of, in
one sense of the word, not being as economically or
educationally deprived as a lot of blacks were. I
still knew there were two separate worlds. I only,
and I still was looked at, or we were still appeared
at in that subservient role. But because of the
strength of those things and
the callers tended to know a little bit more about
the black man. I mean the white man than the average
black man. Because my parents, my grandparents
both had college degrees. Oh, they did? Yeah,
Tuskegee Institute. So, consequently, my
grandmother was a teacher. My grandfather on my
father's side had little or no education. But on my
mother's side, both my mother's parents were. I
graduated from the College of Tuskegee
Institute. So that put you in just a different
perspective than a lot of others. Yeah, somewhat
different perspective, even though there were
things that happened to my family that equalized
the situation. Like my father's business was
burned, which equalizes the banks. wouldn't loan
him money, he had to leave and go to another state to
make some money to come back and reestablish
himself. So, you know, I was in one sense, and I
wasn't in the other sense. So.
Now, I just wanted to ask you a little bit about
voting. And were you registered to vote when you
when you became of legal age or? Yes, I was
registered. My dad registered the vote. He did?
One of the few blacks in Pike County. At one time, I
was probably the only black in Pike County,
Alabama, that was registered. Did he have to take
one of the understanding tests? I went with him.
Really? And they asked him a bunch of crazy
questions. Specific little Article 2 section,
that kind of thing? Well, this is kind of to show you
the kind of thing that they're asking. I never will
forget the answer my dad gave. What you had were
people who themselves were uneducated, given
these tests, and they asked my dad one question I
remember just distinctly. How many bubbles were
there in a bar, a four ounce bar of ivory soap?
Really? What did he say? Well, my dad told him that
he would have to measure the precise size of it and
everything, but if you use the formula E equals MC
squared, you can find it. And I asked him later on,
what was that? E equals MC squared. He said, oh,
they're dumb. They don't know the answers to their
own questions. So they thought he knew what he was
talking about. Yeah, they thought he knew what he
was talking about. By God, he's a smart nigga.
I wanted to ask you a little bit more about, now I
wanted to ask you a little bit more about when you
actually became involved in the Civil Rights
Movement. When did you start becoming involved?
My family became involved with the original Bush
boycott. My dad in 1955. I was doing pretty well in
business at the time. In Birmingham? No, in
Brundage. I was not in Birmingham. Did they have
Best Boy Cuts like that? No, it was in Montgomery
only, where it originally began. My hometown is
only about 52 miles from Montgomery. My mom and
dad, I knew a lot about Montgomery because my
little hometown only had about Well, they had less
than 2,000 people. And we went to Montgomery to
shop. Oh, I see. It was one of the few times that you
went to, they had a Woolworth's there. And I could
go in and eat hot dogs. Right. But there were two
sections, black section and white section. So
when this, and my parents were always involved
with the NAACP.
And the NAACP was the group that really was behind
the boycott. Dr. King was just chosen. And Dr. King
was chosen because he had not been tainted by the
white power structure. What they did with most of
the ministers, they like bought them off. And Dr.
King was the new kid on the block. And the NAACP felt
that he hadn't been there long enough. to be
tainted. Ms. Rosa Parks herself was the secretary
of the Montgomery Chapel of the NAACP. Oh, really?
So the lady who refused to give up a seat. And this
thing had been tried back in 54. I'm going to run the
phone. OK. Rodney, take this with you up there. OK.
In 54,
I knew this because I remember my parents
discussing and talking about it. You had no TV or
radio at the time. And on top of that, I was a paper
boy for my little hometown. For both sections, you
had two papers. The white paper had one star. The
black paper had two stars on it. But because my dad
was an efficient person, he was allowed to deliver
both. Oh. The white paper and the black paper. They
trusted him with that? Yeah, well, but
consequently, you got the opportunity to read
what was in both papers. Uh-huh. And, uh, black
paper had a slant to the knee for blacks. Really?
And, you know, it had a different slant for whites.
To keep him uninformed about... Right. Hold on a
second. People want to hear? Oh, you just...
They had kind of a slant. Yeah. Well, you know, to be
a bit more specific, so my dad helped, you know, he
sent money and a car to Montgomery, so they had
transport.
My first real, I never, my parents, even though
they themselves were, you know, active in what
they could do at the time, Most of the whites felt my
dad was crazy, you know. But they tried to protect
the children like any parent would do. And my dad,
he told me when I left home going to Tuskegee, you
know, not to get involved with anything. But then
Dr. King came to a church off campus one night.
We
were just talking about, I wanted to ask you also
about, you had said that your father sent some cars
to Montgomery. You had read a little bit about
that, about trying to get some alternative things
for the buses. Yeah, well, my dad sent cars and
money to the movement up there. Uh, what happened,
they asked people all over Alabama, blacks all
over Alabama, to help support these people. And,
you know, naturally, economically, blacks, you
know, were still relatively poor. Uh, were
relatively, you know, poor. But they, those, you
know, they spent what they could, a dollar. Right.
You know, a quarter, fifty cents, you know, just a
little bit. Sure. For every little bit of help.
Right. And also they donated money for the court
suits that followed.
And so that's about the time already, that's when
you started getting exposed to the pistol? Yeah,
yeah, during that time. There were a lot of racial
incidents that happened to me as a kid. There were
things that happened to me as a kid. There were
things that happened and things that didn't
happen, you know, as a kid.
You know, that let me know that I was different in
some respects.
Some things, though, made me know that I was also
equal. I was even superior to some people.
But there were things that kind of let you know
where you stood. If you saw a white man coming down
the street, a white woman, then you had to move off
the side of the street and let them by. Or if a white
lady had on shorts, you better not look at them. You
might get put in jail.
When I was a kid, my dad came to that town and bought
property on the north side. And the town kind of
grew around him. And he sold his land to anybody. So
four houses down from us have a white family. Oh,
really? And this kid, Winston, and I were like the
same age. And we went. He was white. He was a white
kid. And he went to a separate school. The kid next
door was black, and the next door, immediately.
But there was Winston, and then you had the Bars who
lived a little bit further up
north of us. On the same Main Street. My dad, which
is unusual for a black to live on Main Street in a
southern town, but it just happened that he They
come there early and they bought the property
early. And when nobody wanted it, when they built a
highway through there and made the property, you
know, badly. Right. Yeah.
But there were things that happened. I saw kids. I
saw one girl get her teeth knocked down. When we
were little kids, I mean like 12 years old, because
we were in line. What could provoke someone to do, I
mean? Because you were black.
The town is made like a Y. And I guess, if I could say.
The town is made like a Y, like this is Main Street.
If you come up here in 231 or take you to Troy,
Alabama, it winds around it. You know, they had no
rhyme or reason for the way they did. But they also
had a highway where we lived, which was also Main
Street. It came up this way. And kids, you know,
this girl and I met at the Y. Not by chance. The
little girl? The little girl. Uh-huh. My dad sent
me to the post office, which is located up here, I
guess about a half mile down. And town had two sides
to it. And we went walking, looking in the windows
on the various stores and everything down there.
And
I was late. We were late. because your parents
didn't want you to stay out too long because they
would probably whip you or something like that. We
were standing in line at the post office to buy a
stamp. And we were next up to the counter. And
people kept coming around us, getting waiting on
them. And they were whites. And this was like in the
middle of the day. And so the blacks and most of them
were working. And so, you know, the girl said, Mr.,
we're next, you know. And, you know, told us to shut
up. And so three or four more people. And we weren't
saying anything out of disrespect to them. We just
didn't want to get a whipping when we got home.
Right. And so she said, Mr., we're next, we're
next. And he just reached over the counter and hit
her in the mouth. Oh, to the post? The postmaster.
And, you know, blood was everywhere, you know, and
I said, well, you know, I told him, I said, well,
sir, you didn't have to hit her, you know, and he
reached over to hit me, but there was a white man
there, and this white man called his hand and said,
don't hit that boy. Well, that's Kerry Colley's
son. Oh, man. But as I said, they thought my dad was
crazy, because he didn't take anything off
anybody. He was a crazy nigga. And he didn't work
for whites either. So by virtue of that, he did do
contract work, but he would not go and work an 8 to 5
job. But anyway, that's it. So he didn't really
have anybody to answer to or that could harass him?
No. We sold out goods. We sold out goods to
everybody. in the community, black and white,
because my dad was the only store that opened at 5
o'clock in the morning. And it was the only store
that was open at night after 5 o'clock in the
afternoon. So consequently, everybody bought
from us. So they had another little thing in my
hometown on Thursday at noon, everything closed.
And his was the only store that was open.
on, you know, Saturday evenings, or after church
on Sunday, he'd open. I guess it's kind of the
forerunner of the convenience store. But, you
know, they knew him, and so that happened, but I
have had incidents that were, did happen to me. So I
knew in one sense where I stood, and I knew in
another sense where I stood, too. But getting back
to this... The first time I was involved, Dr. King
came to the Tuskegee. And they told us not to go over
to the president and everything. At your college?
Yeah, I said, don't go over there. So we went
anyway. You know, a bunch of kids. Right. You know,
somebody tell you don't do something when you're a
kid. You know, that's a thing that you really. Were
you about 20-ish or not? No, I was only 17. I was a
freshman at the time. Oh, okay. First year. And I
went. And he spoke. And I feel like I had to march.
You know, he was just that eloquent. A spokesman.
Yeah. And, you know, he was saying what was
happening in Tuskegee. In that county there, you
had a county where Tuskegee dominated that
county. like Texas A&M dominates, rather. And
even though it was a black institution,
you had a learned black population there. You had
blacks with money and land. And you had a majority
of the population was black. But the whites,
through fear, kept the, I would just say the
so-called locals, a lot like it is here, at bay, you
know, with stuff. And it was the people, the
average run-of-the-mill person that, you know,
really the marchers benefited the most because
you had, always had a black elite. People don't
realize it, but you've always had a black elite.
You even had blacks who owned slaves themselves.
I'm sure you've all heard about that. But we went
anyway, and Dr. King said something that night
that stuck with me. Even though he said that we
might get killed, bad things could happen to us, he
said that if a man wasn't willing to die for
something, that his life wasn't worth living.
And, you know, you said, you know, you emphasized
the point that if you didn't feel strong enough
about a wrong or injustice or anything that you
were fully committed to it, then you weren't much
of a person. And it went on and on. You know, you
heard speeches and you were ready to march. Yeah.
Right. And that's how, really, I got involved. And
you probably, did you ever hear of Congressman
John Lewis? I wanted to read it live because I was
going to ask you, I had a picture of him and what have
you. John Lewis was like a couple of grades ahead of
me in high school and he was one of the founders of
SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee. That's what you told me a little bit
over the phone with. I talked with my history
teacher a little bit about that. and uh but john
lewis was one of the founders of it um and after
talking with king and john lewis you know they kind
of formed a network among you know the youngsters
and college students and that's john lewis and my
hearing that speech you know Right. Had me on my
way. So did you start, did you do some stuff with
SNCC, or did you? Yeah, we went around to a lot of
college chapters and helped organize SNCC's
chapters. We sat at some counters, lunch
counters. Oh, y'all did? At the Woolworths, or
just at the any? Yeah, at the Woolworths. You know,
well, they would do a pick a target. And then,
because a lot of times the local people, so much
pressure could be put on them. Our side was, as they
called us, troublemakers. We would go in and test
them.
There were no laws at the time, but to call
attention to the problem. The Civil Rights Bill
wasn't passed until the mid-60s. Johnson really
got an accommodation bill, I think, prior to
Johnson. Civil rights legislation didn't come
until Johnson, until Johnson did. Well, did they
have training sets? Yeah, they trained you how to
ball up and how to protect your vital parts. They
did that. So then when y'all went around and helped
the other chapters, y'all did that? Told you how
not to say things or do things that would inflame
people, and they tested. your ability to be
peaceful. To hold your tempers back? Yeah. They
would berate you verbally and maybe assault you
verbally. If you could, just sit there calmly and
quietly and let them. The whole objective was not
for you react, but to show the world how these
people really were and put them in a bad light. And
most of the time, you got obliged. Right. Well,
when the TV, we talked about just about that time
that, especially in Birmingham, when they
started marching, that a lot of that started on TV,
and that's when people became aware of that. Aware
of what was really going on, right. so yeah you
wanted to see that uh i remember that there was a
public uh riding you know like the greyhound bus um
of course the bus that i was on it didn't nothing but
the buses john lewis and some of them were on that
was the famous bus that was burned that was um he was
on that bus when one of the free call them the
freedom riders right But there were, you know,
numerous things that, you know, numerous marches
that Tuskegee itself. We went to Birmingham prior
to the Great Birmingham March. Great Birmingham
Rides, really, I guess you would call it. And we sat
down a few places. But they didn't get, you know,
the notoriety that we were put in jail, surrounded
by the Ku Klux Klan and all this kind of thing. Did
they have the, they didn't have, I just saw, I just,
the one thing I remember from seeing that is like
the fire hoses that they had out in, in that. Yeah. I
wasn't in that, no. They didn't have that when you
were before that? No, I demand they just burn you
and beat you. You know, they take cigarettes and
you see nothing. Gosh. And they can assault you
verbally, kick you, beat you, and the police will
be standing right there. And doing nothing, just
standing there and looking?
Um, did you feel like it was about, when did you feel
like the people really started getting
frustrated, like, from this, I mean, I know
probably there was frustration all along, but
when people started turning more towards, um,
like, black power instead of just this not
peaceful non-violence, or did you? I think
basically, um, black power had its, uh, moments,
but I don't think that black power ever really, uh,
caught on in the black community. I know it was
during this time that John Lewis and a lot of the
original people in SNCC got out of it when Stokely
Carmichael and Ralph Brown started doing this.
Because it was a policy that really would only lead
to genocide, the types of things they were
actively seeking.
You know, you didn't have the weaponry, you didn't
have the numbers, you had nothing to wage any type
of war of any time, of any length or duration, so
there was a few left. Which is what they wanted to
do. Yeah, yeah. Ultimately, they hollered the
black power, and black power of itself to the
thinking people, you know, people who had, you
know, started this thing a long time before they
came along with an empty holler, that's all. It
meant nothing. It had nothing. It frightened
people. And Dr. King and the original SNCC people,
they wanted not to frighten whites, but to elicit
the supports of whites who were right. And black
power had the opposite effect of what the movement
started out to be. So there were those blacks, or
like whites, who think that violence and all of
this can handle it. But in the end, it would have
proved, if it had been an all-out black-white
struggle, it would have ended in chaos and you
wouldn't have won. So did you, like when you said
John Lewis and all those started dropping out of
SNCC, was that when they started, like a lot of the
white little students from the north that were in
there, when that's when they started ousting and
that's when they, was that when they started
leaving? Yeah, that's when they started leaving
it. And I'll never forget, it started, the focus
started going someplace else. And I guess the most
graphic thing, I can remember being in
Mississippi, and we were talking, trying to get
people to support galvanized and everything. And
there was this fringe of SNCC people who were
honoring black power. And there was a man, an old
man, laying on that farm, black farmer, who got up
and said
You can holler black power all you want. And he
wasn't dressed nice. He had on all broken hands and
two or three pair overalls. But he reached inside
those overalls, and he had a roll of like $100
bills. And he said, this is power. And this is where
we need to go. And he said, if you have money in
America, you got power. And I know for me, that was
kind of a telling thing. The laws were fine and
everything like that, but money really was the
equalizer. So, so you never really moved in or
became involved with that? Well, not with the
Black Power thing too much, no. Um, mine was like in
the early years, like, I only was only for a brief
period, say like 59 through 61.
when I was involved after that time. You know, I was
sending money and what have you, but after getting
kicked out of Tuskegee and coming to Texas and, you
know, I... You came out, you didn't get your... No,
I didn't graduate. I was a radical at the time, and
you have to understand the situation. That
Tuskegee Institute, unlike Texas A&M, even
though they are both, had the military tradition.
They both were fine agricultural and mechanical
schools. Both Tuskegee had, at the time I
attended, one of the top 10 veterinary schools in
the nation.
There was no integration. The state of Alabama
subsidized Tuskegee. I'm saying this now. I
didn't know why at the time. like I later found out.
I knew it was something. I just thought they were on
the tone at the time, the white president and dean
and all those people. But I found out why they did
what they did.
The state supported Tuskegee's Veterinary
Medicine School, the engineering school, and all
of these things. Because they didn't want anybody
to go to the University of Alabama. They didn't
want blacks to go to the University of Alabama.
Auburn, see, Auburn is about 30 miles from
Tuskegee, over 30 miles. And they didn't, the
legislators pressured these people and said,
look, you know, you put out these radicals, you
know, you're going to withdraw your funds. And I
just feel that that was one of the reasons why a lot
of us force to leave. Even though, you know, I was an
honor student. Really? And everything, but
because I was a part of that radical element, you
know, I had to go. That threatened there. Yeah. I
had to go. So did, um, so when you came here, then,
um, is that when you became active in the NAACP
here? I came to Waco. Okay. And I, uh, I was a black
minister in my hometown who, uh, looked who had
gone to school with the president, then
president, of Paul Quinn College. And I haven't
been in the South in a lot of those colleges. A lot of
them, the state school and things, that's in
Walrus.
But he called them, and they accepted me, and
transcript and everything. I went to Tuskegee. I
mean, I finished with Paul Quinn College. I didn't
know anybody in Texas either. I thought everybody
in Texas was rich. I owned the oil wells. Really?
Did the what? Owned the oil wells. Oh, yeah. You
know, the only Texans I'd ever seen had the long
boots and Continentals, Lincolns, Caddacks, big
ass and horses and I just, I had this misconception
of Texas. Most people feel that people in the South
were dumb and backwards and poor and all those kind
of things. But that's how I got to Texas. And after
graduating from Paul Quinn, then I came to Bryant
High School for 12 years, 12 and a half years.
That's
a lot. I'm going to turn this over real quick.